Instructor: Just like all of my other courses,
this course is highly practical
but it does not neglect the theory.
So we'll start with the basics
just to make sure that you really understand
what web applications are and how they work,
the technologies used
and how these technologies work together
to produce these platforms that we love and use every day.
So a website is basically just a web application
installed on a server,
and a server is simply just a computer.
So right now we have this computer.
It could be any computer, it could be a personal computer
and when we say it's a server,
it just has certain applications on it
that allow it to act as a server.
Now, generally, servers on the internet are accessible
from any computer on the internet.
So they're hosted on the cloud as they call them now
and basically it has a real IP
and then anybody connected to the internet
is able to communicate with this computer.
Because this computer has a specific application
that allow it to act as a server, we call it a server.
But if you strip everything down,
it basically just a computer
with special programs installed on it.
Then we make that computer accessible over the cloud,
over the internet, which makes it very appropriate to use
as a web server or a server that can be accessed
from other computers or other locations.
Now, a very common application
that could make it act as a server is a web server.
Now, what is a web server?
It's basically an application that you can install
on any computer
so the computer doesn't even have to be exposed
to the internet.
You can install it on your own local computer,
even if it's not connected to the internet.
It's just an application.
And what that application does,
it specifies a certain location within your file system
and in that location you can host files.
So anybody connected to the same network as you,
or if this computer is exposed to the internet
and anybody that is on the internet will be able to access
the files stored within the web route
or the file that the web server uses to serve files
to the users.
Now, web servers usually also contain
the web application files.
So a web application is similar to any application.
The only difference is it's designed to run on a web server
and designed to be served over the internet
to another computer.
So the web server can execute web application languages
similar to PHP, Python and Ruby.
So you would have the web application files stored
within the web server 'cause like I said,
the initial goal of the web server
is to be able to serve files to remote computers
using a web browser, using the HTTP protocol.
The web application files contain codes
so the website files could be images,
they could be normal HTML files,
so they don't really contain code.
But the web application files,
they actually contain code written in a program and language
that can process information and manipulate it
and do useful tasks.
So it would be written in languages
like PHP, Python, Ruby, and so on.
And most websites that actually do something useful
other than websites just simply display information
like a shop website, they would actually be written
in a programming language such as these.
Now, another very common component
of a website is the database.
So the web server contains the files like images,
styling files, HTML files.
These are all just used to display the website
to render the website
and then you have the web application files
which is the ones run on the server side to process data.
But the data is usually stored in a different application
which is called a database.
Now the database contains a number of tables
and we have in here a sample of a table.
And we're assuming that this table contains products
that are being sold on a shop website.
So you can see we have the ID of the products.
We have the title so this is an iPhone,
an iPad, a mouse, and the price,
we have the price in here for each of these products.
So the web server contains the HTML pages,
the beautiful pages that you actually see.
The ones with the...
It contains the images so the images for the iPhones,
the iPads, the mouses that this website is selling.
It also contains a web application that interacts
with the database to display all of these products.
So the web application itself doesn't contain the products.
The product information is stored in the database.
Now, the database contains a number of tables.
This is just one example of a table.
It'll contain tables, for example, for the users
and it'll contain the usernames and the passwords.
And then users, when they log in,
the web application will communicate with the database
to check if the username you supplied
is the same one as the password.
So it's very important to understand
the role of the database.
Web application stored on the web server,
it just communicates with the database, gets information
and then displays it or does something useful with it
but the data itself is not stored on the web server,
it's not stored within the web application.
It's actually stored on the database.